ok so moving on now to talk about
date time now if we are dealing with dates rather
than just times and we want to actually
do just we are going to use the date time
module so in the previous video we talked a lot
about time but if you dealing with
dates rather than just times it's
probably better to use the DateTime
module even if time does include dates as
you saw in the previous video before we
go on to the datetime module we're going
to have a quick look at the time zone
support that exists in the time module
now we can get information on the
current time zone via time.timezone and time.tzedname now these
aren't functions timezone returns a number of
seconds offset from UTC so in other
words it will be negative for country's east of the Greenwich Meridian
and most of Western Europe and positive for the country's west of Greenwich in the
UK for example it is 0 so it uses the non day light saving time DST time when
calculating the offset which means that
you also have to check to see if daylight
savings in effect and if it is to apply
that correction also now tzed name returns
a tuple containing two strings
the name of the non dst timezone and
also the name of the DST time zone
now before relying on the DST timezone name
we need to check the value of time.daylight if this is non-zero
then a DST timezone is defined and you can
trust that at that point the second string
in the tzed name tuple otherwise
you shouldn't use the second string and
you'll see how to use this shortly so what we
gonna do is we are going to print out a couple
of examples and use these functions so
let's go and start doing that now and
you can see that I've created a new
project called dates and datetime and
created a new Python file called dateandtime.py so lets start by importing...
....
...remember we talk about epoch in previous videos.....
.....
making sure you are typing it in lower case because it
does make a difference and for the first we are going to use...
0 going back to the first possible date
if you recalled again we discuss that in a
previous video on the next line let's
do the current time zone so...
....
...in adelaide australia because obviously this
is where the video is being recorded
from so the current timezone is and we'll use a replacement field 0 with an off set of 1
.....
....to obtain the current timezone
and just as a reminder if you go back to the
documentation do search i mean the in time
help which we've seen in a previous
video if we do a searched for STR if time
on that page you can see the various
parameters that are actually
are supported and you saw that I've use local as the appropriate DateTime
representation %c back to the code is you can see it on line 3 so
that's where that's coming from and
we've also then printed out of the
time zone and of set which I've talk about the
first tuple tzedname and then also
the timezone but remember we need to
check that first to see where the
daylight saving is in effect so put...
.....
...and I can tell you
now in Australia in January when I'm
recording this video daylight saving
is in effect so we should get
confirmation of that but obviously if
you run this in your part of the world
and daylight saving isn't in effect you will probably get it you
or you should get a different result and the
DST time zone is...
remembering that is the second part the first part we can use which we defined or we
showed outputted on line 5 but remember that
we said you need to check daylight
saving time and if it is in effect in
other words in other words if it's not
equal to 0 then and only then can you use
the second one the second string which
is basically the DST timezone
otherwise it's not necessarily going to
return a valid response ok so
moving lets print out local time so
I'm going to... and we
can do something like this we can go...
.....
....
...you can probably guess what this is
going to do....I'm going to have no
parameters for local time so it does
indeed return the right time and I'm going
to copy the exact same string and exactly make a few
changes I'm going to change it to UTC time and down the end
instead of time.localtime we change
that
to...and if we go back to
the documentation you can see the
various parameters that are used capital
Y year without century as
a decimal number we also used to lower
case m month as a decimal number
noting that if you use upper case M it is going to
give you the minutes and not the month which
is why you want to check carefully
that your are choosing the right upper and lowercase
characters that you have seen me enter and obviously the other ones are our
captial M is for the minute and capital
S is for second ok enough talk
lets run this application so I'm going to
right click it and run it and there's our output
and you can see firstly the epoch on the
system starts on Thursday January
1st 1970 we've discussed previously how that's like a standard date that a lot
of date and time modules use as the starting
date the epoch in other words current
timezone is a ACST that is Australian central
standard time because I'm in the middle
of Australia with an offset of -34200 daylight saving time is in effect
for this location and I mentioned that it
would be and should be because that is
the case here in January in Australia
and the DST time zone is Australian
central Daylight Time local time you
can see year is 2016 month is 01 for
January the date is the 20th and its 3:49 p.m. in
the afternoon and note that the UTC
time because obviously Adelaide time is
offset from that we are actually ahead of that
time by nine and a half hours normally
so the UTC time is 5:19 and going back and
looking at those parameters again looking
at this %Z and the %z you might have been tempted
to actually use those to display the
timezone offset in line 11 of the code
and that's this line here the local time their on line 11 but keep in mind that
the capital z has been deprecated in the time module much that means that you should
avoid using it because it may be removed
from the language in the future and the
other thing to mention is that the lower
case reversion isn't necessarily
supported by all systems so if we go back and
have a look at the documentation
and if we do a search for the lowercase version of percent z
it is giving a warning there about
platform-specific but we will keep searching
right down the bottom you can see now the use of percent
capital z is now deprecated but the
lowercase version the %z escape
that expands to the preferred hour/minute offset is not supported by all ANSI
C libraries so in other words you can't be
guaranteed that the code you
write will give the same results on all
platforms and obviously that's a bad
thing so keep that in mind as well
incidentally they don't really make any
mention of the fact that percent lower
z and the date time string have a timer function saying in their in that it shouldn't be used but we are only knowing it now that's the case
ok so let's move on to date time now so what I'm going to do is comment the code out
and I am going to start by using
some date time modules now functions from
the date time module I should say now before I start the date time module documentation and I'm going to bring it on the
screen and you can see the link there on
the screen to that date time module
now there is talk in there if you want to actually
have a look at it and read it talks
about naive and a where date and time
objects what that actually means is that
a where objects are aware of the time
zone offset projects and naive objects aren't aware of that
so date objects are naive and DateTime objects
can be aware so because timezone aware
objects are slightly more complicated
we're going to cover them here and if you
want to use date objects they work
exactly the same pretty much but you
can ignore anything to do with time
zones in DST daylight saving time
when using those so let's start with some
simple examples of using date time and
we're going to have a look at a couple
modules so lets have a look at the first one I'm gonna do a search for datetime
and you will come up and see that there's a DateTime
objects so there is a date time module and
there is also a date time class so consequently
to access them we type DateTime.
datetime so that might be a little bit
confusing when you see that for the
first time but I will show you in the code what I mean anyway but that is the way Python set this up so type...
...now the 2 date time entries, the 1st one is the module the 2nd one is the class...
...so let just run the code so on the last example
UTC is now obviously gives us the UTC now if you
happen to be in the UK when you call
this then all three commands will print
the same date and time allowing for a
few milliseconds difference for the
commands to execute and you can see down
here the milliseconds.21762 for the
first entry point .216700
the elapse time is how long the Python
interpreter in IntelliJ took to
process that particular line of code that's
what are the numbers right at the end aren't
exactly the same but you can see in my
case the times are different and that's
because I'm in a different time zone now
today the function today and the
function now appeared to do the same thing
because you can see I've returned the same date
and the same time other than the
milliseconds in the end but the now
method can be more precise and more
importantly now allows us to specify
a timezone by providing a tzed info
object now unfortunately if we read the
documentation for tzed info and we can see
that Python's DateTime.tzed info is
an abstract class
and I'm just going to do a quick search for Python tzinfo actually it was was probably in that doc anyway so let's go back to have a look and there
it is on the screen and I'll close the find window
so it is an abstract base class for time zone
information systems now it probably
doesn't make sense to you because we
haven't really talked about classes and
that's going to be coming later in the
course what it means right now for
us is that as far as we're concerned the
datetime.tzinfo object can't
or cannot be created so it might seems very
odd but basically Python DateTime has
the ability to cope with aware dates which
we talked about but the actual method
required to do so is only defined by the
language and not implemented so part
of the rationale for this seems to be
that the local time can actually mean
different things to different people and
as a result it's best left to the
developer to implement tzinfo in a way
that is meaningful to them now speaking
of time zones and for a humorous and very
informative discussion on time zones I
want to bring your attention to a 10 minute
video on YouTube that really does an
excellent job of demonstrating the
problems with time zones so I'm going to bring
this link up on the screen and will go to that video and skip the ad
ok so there is the link at top so that's also in the Resources section
as all these links have been now I
suggest you do take the time to really
watch this video this is the video that
JP found for us and it really does go
through the problem with time and time
zones and you learn a lot of time zones
and the inherent problems that exist
with time zones in computers there is also
another link which may be interested in
to at least a few of you and this relates
to the original discussions that
the Python team had to implementing
the date time and that's all the way back in
March 2002 and there's the link on the
screen for that so check the out as well
for some of the issues and so forth
that they had but if you watch this
video and I do suggest you go away and watch that now
you probably come away very glad to
learn that there is a library available that
deals with the complexity of time zones
and daylight saving time and it's not
part of the standard library that comes
with Python but it's generally speaking
considered to be the best approach to dealing
with time zones although there are
other libraries available but we're going
to talk about that library and
actually install it and then start
working with it in the next video